---
layout: post
title: "Two Explanations"
---

### 1
The deaths of people far away from ourselves (in terms of physical distance or social exposure) are less emotionally salient than the deaths of those near to us. When we see a video of a man asphyxiating to death on a sidewalk in MN, we can relate to that environment much easier than we can relate to an emaciated child in a bed in the Sudan. The reaction is natural. I have a real stake in the former: the man on the side can be one of my friends and the man on his throat <i>cannot</i> be me (and my friends need to know that). Further, no one shares videos of sick children in developing countries anymore, and certainly not juxtaposed to videos of racialized violence in America. That dimension of privilege is trite, and overplayed, and has therefore lost its emotional and political salience. 


### 2
The non-letal and indirect negative effects of bad policing are ill-understood and largely unquantified. In comparing the effects of bad policing to the worsening of Covid due to lax social distancing, Rob Wiblin [writes][wiblin]:

>While police killings or murders draw the most attention, much more damage is probably done in other ways, such as through over-incarceration, petty harassment, framing innocent people, bankrupting folks through unnecessary fines, enforcing bad laws such a drug prohibition, assaults, and so on. And that total damage accumulates year after year.

This is likely true! We should fix policing for the people police kill, but much more so for the people they rob and beat and deprive of livelihoods. These effects must be taken into account when comparing BLM to other causes (Covid, 15,000 preventable child deaths per day). While I'm no Jennifer Doleac, I'm familiar enough with the literature to know there isn't one quantification of these effects of policing.  However, some protestors look at this epistemic shrugging and assume the worst: "if we don't have a number there, it must be a substantial fraction of infinity" (not actually anyone's thought pattern). 

### 3
These two points go a long way to explaining why good people who care about human lives are protesting. And there are rational arguments to be made from each of these! However, no one is making them. That must be the next step, before they go back to the crowded streets.

### UPDATE 

I underappreciated the size of point 2 above. Without diving into the literature, the higher end of "preventable, premature deaths of African Americans due to health outcome inequality" is [100,000][williams] [annually][satcher]; the [methodology][levine] looks sane? This is a huge number, and should be much more salient than the relatively few African Americans killed by police each year. 

This does not effect my conclusion, I think. 100,000 is many fewer than 5,500,000, and deaths due to unequal access to healthcare and environmental factors are less tractable than malarial and diarrheal deaths. 


[wiblin]: https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/hyisZr7n9fYTXx7g8/will-protests-lead-to-thousands-of-coronavirus-deaths?commentId=qd6DGo3W6mwRXZeTS
[levine]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1497364/
[satcher]: https://sci-hub.tw/https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.24.2.459
[williams]: https://sci-hub.tw/https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.24.2.459
