---
layout: post
title: "May Links, Part 1"
---
Here are some links I've sent to friends around the internet this past week, usually without context. Here I'll provide a bit more context and thoughts. 

### [Edenville Dam Collapse][edenville]

A dam in Michigan collapsed earlier this week, flooding a small town. Homes were destroyed, businesses ruined, [pictures][edenville-pics] capture the scale of the tragedy. Right now, it seems the operators were likely at fault. In true American style, lawsuits ensue. 

I was caught by [this video][edenville-geo], both for the footage of the catastrophic failure itself and the discussion on "The Landscape Blog" below. This was a clinical description of geological phenomena, bracketed by notes about the tragedy. I work as a business analyst in the space industry: half of my colleagues are physicists and planetary geologists fascinated by the minutiae of Martian dust particles or a bit of Jupiter the size of Texas. The other half are policy people trying to get the science done. The space community has a lot of practice arguing how what we do benefits humanity (beyond GPS and DirecTV). I don't think landslide geologists have as much practice. 

Obviously (🙄) space is cooler and more expensive than landslide geology, making it easier to get resources and more of them needed. But reading about failing toe bulges is just as interesting at a superficial level, and way easier to argue for relevance. This is a plea for interdisciplinary research, I think?

### What Can't You Spell?

[A fun map][spelling] of what word each state has the hardest time spelling, using Google search trends. Look at your own state, then Virginia, Connecticut, and Oregon for a laugh or a puzzle. Confusing causation for a moment, I apparently live in Nebraska. Sinserely, me.

### Romney "Fixed" A Homeless Shelter Budget Crisis

Massachusetts has previously had a policy that, once a homeless shelter was full, the state would pay to put up any newcomers in a hotel. This was very expensive for the state. Romney, while governor, [switched][romney] the policy that when a newcomer arrived to a full shelter the longest-term resident of hte shelter would move to the hotel and the newcomer would take their bed. "Before, the state was renting an average of 500 hotel rooms a night, at a cost of $20 million per year. Afterward, that line item fell to zero."

The money was put to good use finding permanent homes for homeless populations. What's curious is, who was it who stopped coming to shelters? Revealed preferences here seem to be ```hotel > street > homeless shelter```, for at least the newcomers. Unless these were crazy tourists, hyperaware of homeless policy, who wanted to stay in a cheap Boston motel on Mitt Romney's dime? 

### Does Georgism Make Sense?

Not to me.

The only city I've lived in for any extent of time is Kolkata, so I have an odd understanding of density. Land policy is a fascinating lever, and one we as a politics don't move enough. Henry George had a radical take, which was not taken as particularly radical. Here are 34 ["Georgist Koans"][koans]; highly recommended.

### How to Signal Over Zoom

A great coronavirus twitter account, [Bookcases of Credibility][bookcases]. Notice that not one of the titles can be made out; [model this][foot-books].

Also, I was recently in a friend's mansion in a very expensive part of the city. There were thousands of books across four stories; I found three copies of <i>Lolita</i> and no poetry. I wish I had brought it up.

### Lottery of Fascinations

[Crappy metaphore, great analogy][lottery]. I think I got lucky with my fascinations (I am fascinated by them, after all; I'm only "talented at <i>easy</i> things"). But my fascinations and skills do put me in a good position to both do good and do well. 





[edenville]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edenville_Dam
[edenville-geo]: https://blogs.agu.org/landslideblog/2020/05/21/edenville-dam-failure-2/
[edenville-pics]: https://twitter.com/DJPhotoVideo/status/1263276582506037248
[spelling]: https://twitter.com/GoogleTrends/status/1263531204256493568
[romney]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/mitt-romney-the-problem-solver/2011/12/01/gIQAkSGXlO_story.html
[koans]: https://gravitylobby.club/trashcan.html
[bookcases]: https://twitter.com/BCredibility/status/1260676184645472266
[foot-books]: https://www.booksbythefoot.com/shop/pc/viewAllPrds.asp
[lottery]: https://slatestarcodex.com/2013/06/30/the-lottery-of-fascinations/

