---
layout: post
title: "Jots on Georgism"
---

San Francisco tends to turn people into Georgists, including Henry George:

>“Where the conditions to which material progress everywhere tends are most fully realized—that is to say, where population is densest, wealth greatest, and the machinery of production and exchange most highly developed—we find the deepest poverty, the sharpest struggle for existence, and the most of enforced idleness… If there is less deep poverty in San Francisco than in New York, is it not because San Francisco is yet behind New York in all that both cities are striving for? When San Francisco reaches the point where New York now is, who can doubt that there will also be ragged and barefooted children on her streets?”

Was he wrong? The virtue of a single tax is a topic for another time, but the ultimate heresy of Georgism is that land is not capital. "Where you can think of capital as stored up human labor, land is not that. Buildings are capital, as is tooling, but land deserves to be thought of as a separate input to production, on equal footing with labor and capital." 

This is especially evident with far less knowledge labor being conducted on commercial land. If the developers of Silicon Valley don't have to be in, or can't be, in Silicon Valley, what changes? Their labor is worth the same; in many cases more (everyone with Amazon equity can retire five years earlier now). The whole economy is less liquid, but those developers' firms have plenty of access to capital. 

However, Salesforce tower is no longer what it used to be. The falling prices in commercial real estate is a truism at this point of the coronavirus crisis. The land, however, is not necessarily losing value as quickly as the buildings upon it. At the heart of Georgist land policy is buildings being less value than the land they sit on. This dynamic adds to the incentive for developers to get the best use out of each acre, and makes speculation on land a losing venture. 

Georgism certainly has deep connections (positive ones) to ecology, but I haven't been able to articulate those yet. Reading and writing on that to come. 

