---
layout: post
title: "Typology of (Interesting) Risk"
---

Risk has useful meanings in behavioral economics (see my adventures with the GRFP), financial economics, and cause prioritization. The overarching definition of "risk" is something like "uncertainty around cause and effect of human actions and values". Here are some ways risk is interesting to me.

Catastrophic risk is the arae I'm most familiar with: small probabilities of large effects have often been more salient to me. But these probabilities don't seem particularly small anymore; I think a 1 in 6 chance humanity doesn't see 2100 isn't absurdly high. Studying this type of risk is mostly about reducing it, and convincing people it's worth reducing.

The second part is where behavioral economcis integrates risk (risk is one of the most important topics in decision theory and will likely recur here). People respond unpredictably and irrationally to risk. Thought experiments around risk (and then replicating them in lab experiments) produce some trippy results. This is the main line through which standard expected utility theory fails in real life.

To highlight one interesting application of risk, look at Paul Slovic's paper on horse odds. Slovic took prominent horse handicappers, and offered them five pieces of information about each of ten horses in a race. The handicappers produced odds on the horses and their confidence, which were well aligned: 17% accuracy and 19% confidence. In subsequent rounds, Slovic offered 10, 20, 40 pieces of information to the handicappers. Accuracy didn't change with more information, but confidence doubled. Despite marginal returns to new information falling, getting that information induces risk seeking behavior. 

What are we going to do with insight into risk? First, knowledge of risk allows us to better forecast its probability. Second, knowledge of how we react to risk will make it more straightforward to put in place policies that reduce certain risks. These implications are most obvious around catastrophic risk but of course also exist for local events.
