---
layout: post
title: ""
---

Every ideology has its utopia. Many ideologues have detailed their utopia; in fact, it's much more common to see descriptions of utopias than it is to see a roadmap to get there. 

If we look at the recent history of Western ideology as a story of reaction (not recommended), the utopias tied to the most successful thinkers are remarkably similar. 

### Marx

Marx and Engel's <i>The German Ideology</i> manuscripts largely consist of snark towards the new Hegelians. Marx does, however, take the time to define parts of his new materialism in greater detail here than anywhere else. His theory of history, and its endgame, are prominent in <i>Ideology</i>, and no where else are they so rosy. 

> "...as soon as the distribution of labour comes into being, each man has a particular, exclusive sphere of activity, which is forced upon him and from which he cannot escape. He is a hunter, a fisherman, a herdsman, or a critical critic, and must remain so if he does not want to lose his means of livelihood; while in communist society, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes, society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic."

This triumph of the social over the economic, removed from the rest of the communist manifesto, is the utopia of Marx. Whether or not Marx thought communism would be a [just society][morality], he thought it would clearly advance human flourishing if only because capitalism impedes the same. 

I am not a Marxist. Marxism is complicated and obscurantist. The ideology is either over my head, not worth my time, or both. But the rhetoric Marx and Engel use in describing their utopia, focusing so much more on the eschaton than the immantization, is familiar to anyone reading the pop philosophers. "Here is a possible world," it seems to say. "This could be you. You could be [fishin'][fishing]."

### Keynes

Compound interest indicates we should have a 15 hour work week by now. Or so Keynes wrote in <i>Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren</i> in 1930, the darkest days of the British Great Depression. He predicted "that the standard of life in progressive countries one hundred years hence will be between four and eight times as high as it is to-day". We're more than on track for that in the United States, in terms of economic output per person, and have exceded it in developing countries on all metrics. The economic problem (to Keynes, that of scarcity) was not a permanent state, but could be exited.

At this point, the only question left is "how to use {this} freedom from pressing economic cares, how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest will have won, to live wisely and agreeably and well." Marx's answer, to hunt, fish, criticise, jumps back into mind. Marx's <i>Ideology</i> was rejected at the time of writing in 1846 and wasn't published until two years after <i>Economic Possibilities</i>. But both intellectuals had, centuries off, a similar vision. 

This comparison is surface level: Keynes, in bed with Virginia and Leonard Woolf and the other bohemians of Bloomsbury, aspired to promote an intellectualism over materialism. The dichotomy Keynes paints inherently rejects Marxist materialism. 

### Neoliberals

To get this out, I'll describe this extensionally: <i>The Road to Serfdom</i>, Elon Musk the South African, the "Nordic" model, John Blundell, the Mont Pelerin Society, the dot-com boom, Camelot but not really, exit rights. 

### New Left?






[fishing]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDeQzjKHaeE
[morality]: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/marx/#5
