---
layout: post
title: "Low and High Trust Societies"
---

The level of trust in a society is important to consider in the consequences of any social policy. It can also be frustrating to measure. 

In a society where trust is low, survey respondents and experimental participants are often reluctant to provide truthful responses. In personal experience, Indian workers are more than willing to pause work to answer an hours-long survey, while French workers will find any excuse not to. In an extreme example, imagine trying to ask residents in a Soviet-era apartment building, "How much do you trust your neighbors?" Even if you get an answer, you probably wouldn't trust it. 

Further, what do we mean by "society"? China is often referenced as a low trust society, but Chinese family and clan ties are notoriously strong. Meanwhile, Israel has low interpersonal trust, but Jews are the paradigmatic example of high community trust. Trust is multidimensional, and the scale is important. 

High trust communities enable some incredibly effective things. Jewish diamond dealers were (and to some extent still do) dominate the diamond market due to their strong community ties. Diamonds are a risky business, as they are "portable, easily concealable, and extremely valuable", and require either trust-based or non-trust based mechanisms to insure transactions. Trust based mechanisms (intergenerational businesses, ethnic homogeneity, private arbitration over public courts) are much cheaper than non-trust based mechanisms (close monitoring of workers, detailed legal arrangements, intermediaries). Tens of millions of dollars in diamonds are regularly handed over on trust in New York between hasids. This is astounding, as it only requires minimal defections to ruin a millenia old infrastructure. 

We might expect commensurate benefits from low trust societies. Here, the causal pathway matters. A truism is that corruption breeds low trust. If this is true, then low trust might be a response mechanism to corruption. Alternatively, low levels of trust guard against greater corruption, and strongarming on a larger political stage. 

The effect of trust on social and economic policy is equally apparent. Some of this comes from Keynes: markets are psychological phenomena, not economic ones. High trust enables institutions to turn savings into investment more efficiently, allowing looser monetary policy. Low trust may act as a brake on inflation or unemployment. "Trust dynamics" (which would require trust time-series) would have something interesting to add here.

I'll end with Cowen and Emanuel on trust and health policy research, especially relevant in quarantine days:

>COWEN: Does the notion of informed consent have real meaning in low-trust societies? Won’t people read the supposed agreement and assume the real conditions of the experiment actually have to be something else? Because they’re used to being screwed over, or the actual deal being different from the stated deal?

>EMANUEL: I think that’s an excellent observation, and we way overemphasize informed consent as a protection of people. I think that’s very common in American society: “Just give people information, and they’ll decide.”
>Well, I don’t have enough time to get information on everything I have to do. I have to trust lots of institutions. I have to trust the regulatory oversight bodies that are making sure the airplanes are working. I can’t go out and inspect the plane every time I take off, and things like that.
>I agree with you. In low-trust societies, or societies where there aren’t good institutions, relying on individuals is no substitute for relying on institutions to protect us. I have often said that it’s very hard for an individual to figure out the risk-benefit ratio of, say, a research experiment or any medical procedure, and that you need to rely on others with expertise.
