---
layout: post
title: "What Makes a Good Critic?"
---


Most articles aren't written for me, or you. In fact, I don't know who the hell some of them are written for. Often, it's pretty clear when something isn't written for me; or rather, that I'm not in the intended audience for a particular piece of writing. This is, of course, no one's fault: taste isn't meant to be universal. 

For news especially I'm very good at predicting what writing I'll be interested in. I learned quickly to stop clicking on links with "Brexit" in their lede; it took me longer to stop starting articles on Covington. But for art critques I have <i>no earthly idea</i> what will capture my interest. A campy essay on the costume designer for the never-produced 1972 "Dune" is interesting; every review of Carly Rae Jepsen's 2019 album (which was my most listened to of the year) fell flat. 

What makes a discussion of someone else's art interesting? Many great pieces of art can stand alone, out of time and space, yet critics find words that, while not art themself, make art more than the sum of its parts. Now, these aren't plaques next to paintings in the Louvre, with rote recitation of artist, date, medium. 

Context is certainly useful. NBC's 2017 "Grease: Live" was a faithful reproduction with first-rate talent. Reading that Vanessa Hudgen's father had passed away the night before and asked her to dedicate Rizzo's "There Are Worse Things I Could Do" to him, however, hits another cord. This isn't to say a better actor than Hudgens couldn't have reproduced the rawness of that moment without that pain. Understanding where that comes from fills in the lines, however. The audience is aware we're watching a production, with real people pretending to be fake people. Knowing more about their real lives lets us digest their fake roles with more validity.

Maybe this is empty self reassurance. An AI producing new paintings in Van Gogh's style is still producing paintings with the style and verve (if well trained) of the best painter in Western canon. But without Van Gogh's pain, is it art? The critic gives us cover to believe that the human product, with a human context behind it, is made more because of that. 

Critics are also useful, or at the least interesting, divorced from their art. There are some critics I will read for insight into something other than the art they are critiquing. Because all art is made for someone, critiques of that art seems to be made for a necessarily larger group of people. Being able to just dip my toes into the pool of a whole genre of art I don't have patience to explore in greater depth is so valuable. 
