---
layout: post
title: "Review and Next Steps - Caplin 2019"
---

I'm reading Caplin et. al's "Long-Term-Care Utility and Late-in-Life Saving". This paper confronts the suprising finding that people do not pay for better long term care in senscense. The authors look to identify preferences among consuming at different time scales, leaving a bequest, and receiving long-term care. 

Using survey data based on novel survey questions, they estimate a structural life cycle model to find when agents save and dissave. The preferences above, comsupmtion, bequeaths, and LTC, are included in in a model with health dependent utility. The goal here is to explain saving behavior.  

The major finding in Caplin et al. is that long-term care trumps bequests, always and in all manners. Their survey questions are designed to elicit preferences in hypotheticals: when someone is trading off between spending on self in need of LTC and bequests, there's a strong desire to spend on self. Both motivations, however, contribute to the motivation to save over the lifetime. Moneyshot: "LTC-related and bequest motives are roughly coequal in determining late-in-life saving, although the effect of each saving motive on saving behavior varies by wealth."

An important consideration in their model, and one I'm hoping to build off of, is the inclusion of social insurance against LTC and health risks as consumption floors. An individual always has the option of taking government care if the need LTC, over paying for very expensive private care (ManorCare vs Foxhill). This comes with the true assumption that government care is strictly worse than private care. This option results in interesting saving behavior: "Because the individual has the option to choose government care, the value function is non-concave and the optimal saving policy is discontinuous."

The discontinuity is only present for middle income people: high income people will always have enough savings for private LTC, even with full consumption, while low income people will never be able to save to the level of private care. The tradeoff for middle income is based in part on their probability of needing LTC and other idiosyncratic state variables. If they save and are frugal in life, they are assured of the ability to afford high quality LTC. If they spend down, they will enjoy life more but risk having to go into Manor Care. Therefore, ther's a threshold wealth level where it makes sense for individuals above to be frugal and individuals below to spend down. 
